REFEREE REPORT
“SYMBOLIC INTEGRATION WITH RESPECT TO THE HAAR
MEASURE ON THE UNITARY GROUP IN MATHEMATICA”
BY PUCHALA, ZBIGNIEW AND MISZCZAK, JAROSLAW

The submission consists of a Mathematica package accompanied by a paper describing the theoretical background behind unitary integration, as well as the functions
implemented in the package.
The theory of unitary integration, although used for some time in the physical literature, has received a rigorous mathematical treatment in the works of Collins and
Collins, Sniady. The theory, in which Weingarten functions play a crucial role, has
been used to great effect in many areas, such as Random Matrix Theory, Mathematical
Physics, Quantum Information Theory, Condensed Matter Physics, etc - it has become
a common tool in any area in which random matrices play a role.
The paper, as well as the Mathematica package, are very well written and provide the
functionality that was aimed for: having a numerical implementation of averages over
the unitary group, using the representation-theoretical approach based on Weingarten
functions. The numerical methods implemented in the package will certainly prove
useful for mathematicians, physicists and computer scientists working with random
unitary matrices. In particular, the package has been developed with applications to
Quantum Information Theory in mind, and some interesting examples are presented in
the paper. A desirable feature that is missing from the computer implementation is the
ability to use formal parameters for integration (such as the dimension). Mathematica
has the capability for such symbolic operations and there are algorithms for dealing
with symbolic integration, at least for reasonable moments. The size of the unitary
group U(d) could have been treated as a symbolic variable (note that there is little
hope to have the same for order of the symmetric group Sn . Moreover, Collins and
Sniady also developed the theory for the orthogonal and symplectic groups, which is
very similar, and, to some extent, consists of replacing the group algebra CSn with the
Brauer algebra Bn . The package would have been more complete with these features
implemented.
Regarding the mathematical content of the paper, some remarks and criticism are in
order. The foremost one is the lack of any analysis of the complexity of the algorithm
used for computing the integrals. It would be interesting to know what are the maximal
values of n (and/or d) for which the package gives an answer in a reasonable amount
of time. Besides a very nice introduction to the subject, the theoretical contribution
of the work under review consists in improving the computation time in some very
special cases. The case where all the elements come from a single line (or column) of
the unitary matrix corresponds to a spherical integral for which simpler formulas are
available. The cases of even powers of diagonal elements (Proposition 2) and that of
cycle permutations (Proposition 3) are new and of interest.
1

2

REFEREE REPORT

For these reasons, I recommend for publication.
Below is a list of small errors, typos, and further remarks.
(1) An an historical remark, the case of the unitary group was first treated in a
rigorous manner by Collins in [1].
(2) I think the presentation would be improved if a description of the algorithms
used for the evaluation of the characters of Sn . This might also include some
computational complexity remarks.
References
[1] B. Collins, Moments and Cumulants of Polynomial random variables on unitary groups, the
Itzykson-Zuber integral and free probability. Int. Math. Res. Not. 17, 953982 (2003)

